People use drugs. It's not a moral shortcoming. It's not a moral deficiency.
It's not lazy or stupid. I don't know any lazy
drug users. My name is Wendy Stevens. I am currently the Peer Operations
Coordinator with Vancouver Coastal Health's Overdose Emergency Response
Team. I do a lot of educational work with healthcare professionals and also
with peers working in the Downtown Eastside. I'm a former drug user and
sex trade worker. I wish people could just for a minute
look past what they see on the surface of someone.
Someone who might be dirty and, you know, shooting up in their back
alley or sleeping in their doorway and just realize that that person,
probably that person doesn't want that for themselves and there's a lot
of things that put that person there. I had a very bad infection
on my arm. The infection was getting really bad. I was getting really
sick from it. So one of the organizations downtown that
I was a member of, they put me in a cab.
They told the cab not to let me out until we got to
the hospital and he didn't. So I went into emergency and I was
in a lot of pain and I was not in a good place.
I was not well, 100% ready to be treated like crap.
The doctor came in and I was in a lot of pain.
They hadn't given me anything for pain and I was crying and
I remember he had an intern with him and I remember he said,
"You know, if you think this is unpleasant for you, how do you
think we feel having to see people like you every day?"
And he leaned over and he said, "If you don't shut up right
now, I'm not giving you anything for pain."
I find it frustrating when people won't even try to understand
what poverty is, what being physically and emotionally dependent on a substance
to get through a day, not even to get high, but just to
get through a day. The start of a conversation might be safe supply.
What do you need? Part of that, giving people what they need,
for me, goes hand in hand with dignity.
There's nothing dignified about ingesting hand sanitizer because your body
needs alcohol. People with diabetes, you know, I don't think anyone's going
to judge that person for eating a Snickers bar
the way we judge people for using substances.
And some people need something because of pain, physical pain, emotional
pain, and we've all had it. I spent many, many years
not liking myself enough to make sure that my body had food or
a place to sleep or a shower or anything really. I just,
I assumed my entire life would be in that
four or five block radius of Hastings that was
the world. I remember thinking that if I could use all of
the knowledge and experience that I had from that part of my life
to help other people get better health care and help people be able
to give better health care, if I could do that, then all of
my time out there wouldn't be for nothing.